Pulmonary air leak syndromes occur when
air escapes from the alveoli and travels into
places it should never be, like the
pleural space,
mediastinum, or even subcutaneous tissue.
For respiratory therapists, this is all
about recognizing when pressure
in the lungs becomes dangerous and knowing
how to respond quickly.
Think of the core problem like this.
Increased alveolar pressure leads to
alveolar rupture.
Once that happens, air follows pressure
gradients and dissects into
surrounding structures.
This can result in conditions like
pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum,
or subcutaneous emphysema.
Clinically, patients may present with
sudden dyspnea,
chest pain, decreased breath sounds, or
visible swelling under the skin.
On exam, you might hear diminished or
absent breath sounds
on one side, and in severe cases,
you may see signs of tension physiology,
like hypotension,
tracheal deviation, or severe hypoxia.
From a board prep standpoint, always
connect barotrauma risk with
mechanical ventilation, especially with
high pressures,
large tidal volumes, or poor lung
compliance.
Also think about spontaneous air leaks in
patients with underlying lung disease,
trauma, or even forceful coughing.
Diagnostics are usually straightforward.
A chest x-ray can confirm most air leak
syndromes,
while ultrasound is increasingly used at
the bedside for rapid detection of pneumothorax.
CT scans provide the most detailed view
when needed.
Management depends on severity.
Small air leaks may only require
observation and oxygen therapy to help reabsorb the
air.
But larger or symptomatic cases require
intervention like needle decompression or chest tube placement.
If you suspect a tension pneumothorax,
this is an immediate
emergency.
Do not wait for imaging.
As an RT, your role is critical.
You are often the first to notice sudden
changes in ventilator pressures,
oxygenation, or patient status.
You must recognize early warning signs,
adjust ventilator settings to
reduce further injury, and communicate
quickly with the care team.
The key takeaway is simple.
Pressure can save lives, but too much
pressure can destroy
alveoli.
Your job is to find that balance and act
fast when things go wrong.